Procurement Policy Note

Improving Transparency of AI use in
Procurement

Information Note: 017
Originally issued: November 2023
Updated: February 2025

 Issue

1. AI systems, tools and products are part of a rapidly growing and evolving market, and
     as such, there may be increased risks associated with their adoption. Care should be
     taken to ensure that AI is used appropriately, and with due regard to risks and
     opportunities. As the Government increases its adoption of AI, it is essential to take
     steps to identify and manage associated risks and opportunities, as part of the
     Government's commercial activities.

 Dissemination and scope

2. This Procurement Policy Note (PPN) applies to all central government departments,
     their executive agencies and non-departmental public bodies. Such bodies are
     referred to as ’in-scope organisation’.

3. Please circulate this PPN within your organisation, particularly to those with a
     commercial procurement and/or contract management role. It may also be relevant to
     those in finance, operational and sustainability roles. Other public sector contracting
     authorities may wish to apply the approach set out in this PPN.

4. This PPN has been updated to reflect new terminology introduced by the Procurement
     Act 2023 and the Procurement Regulations 2024. The Procurement Act 2023 and the
     Procurement Regulations 2024 apply to procurements commenced on or after 24
     February 2025. For more detail on the meaning of 'commenced' please refer to the
     Procurement Act 2023 Guidance on Transitional and Savings Arrangements.

5. The Procurement Act 2023 does not apply to procurements commenced before 24
     February 2025 or to contracts awarded prior to this date (including via frameworks,
     dynamic purchasing systems or qualification systems established under the previous
     legislation). For procurements commenced and contracts awarded before this date,
     please refer to PPN 02/24.

6. This update does not constitute a change in policy or a new call for action but in-scope
     organisation should continue to apply any ongoing obligations set out in the provisions
     of this PPN.

 Timing

7. In-scope organisation should note the provisions of this PPN from 24 February 2025.

 For information

8. There is a range of guidance available to support commercial teams to understand AI
     as a subject area, the appropriate use of AI within public services and how AI products
     should be procured. References to some of this guidance can be found in Annex A.

9. There are potential benefits to suppliers using AI to develop their bids, enabling them
     to bid for a greater number of public contracts. It is important to note that suppliers'
     use of AI is not prohibited during the commercial process but steps should be taken to
     understand the risks associated with the use of AI tools in this context, as would be
     the case if a bid writer has been used by the supplier. This may include:

       ● Asking suppliers to disclose their use of AI in the creation of their tender (See
          Annex B for an example of text that can be added to procurement documentation).

       ● Putting in place proportionate controls to ensure suppliers do not use confidential
          contracting authority information, or information not already in the public domain
          as training data for AI systems e.g. using confidential Government tender
          documents to train AI or Large Language Models (LLMs) to create future tender
          responses.

       ● Undertaking appropriate and proportionate due diligence:
          − If suppliers use AI tools to create tender responses, additional due diligence
              may be required to ensure suppliers have the appropriate capacity and
              capability to fulfil the requirements of the contract. Such due diligence should
              be proportionate to any additional specific risk posed by the use of AI, and
              could include site visits, clarification questions or supplier presentations.

          − Additional due diligence should help to establish the accuracy, robustness and
              credibility of suppliers' tenders through the use of clarifications or requesting
              additional supporting documentation in the same way contracting authorities
              would approach any uncertainty or ambiguity in tenders.

       ● Planning for a general increase in activity as suppliers may use AI to streamline or
          automate their processes and improve their bid writing capability and capacity
          leading to an increase in clarification questions and tender responses.
       ● Potentially allowing more time in the procurement to allow for due diligence and an
          increase in volumes of responses.

       ● Closer alignment with internal customers and delivery teams to bring greater
          expertise on the implications and benefits of AI, relative to the subject matter of the
          contract.

10. In certain procurements where there are national security concerns in relation to use
     of AI by suppliers, there may be additional considerations and risk mitigations that are
     required. In such instances, commercial teams should engage with their Information
     Assurance and Security colleagues, before launching the procurement, to ensure
     proportionate risk mitigations are implemented.

11. Commercial teams should take note of existing guidance1 when purchasing AI
     services, however they should also be aware that AI and Machine Learning is
     becoming increasingly prevalent in the delivery of "non-AI" services. Where AI is likely
     to be used in the delivery of a service, commercial teams may wish to require
     suppliers to declare this, and provide further details (see Example Disclosure Question
     3). This will enable commercial teams to consider any additional due diligence or
     contractual amendments to manage the impact of AI as part of the service delivery.

           An illustrative example: Video Conferencing

        A Contracting Authority is seeking to implement a new video conferencing suite
        in their offices. Key considerations for the functionality of this service may
        include the number of concurrent users, audio and visual call quality, integration
        with existing software and services.

        In such instances, a supplier may be able to provide a service that includes
        meeting transcription, or live translation using Generative AI.

        Additional consideration should therefore be given to how these meeting
        records will be used (e.g. for training of further AI models) and whether the
        information gathered is subject to Data Classification policies.

        In this example, departments will likely want to ensure that proposed contractual
        terms make it clear that data retrieved from the videoconference is appropriately
        managed, e.g. not used for training purposes unless this has been specifically
        agreed and approved in writing by the client.

 Background

12. Generative AI is a form of Artificial Intelligence (AI) - a broad field which aims to use
     computers to emulate the products of human intelligence - or to build capabilities

1 Guidelines for AI Procurement: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidelines-for-ai- procurement
     which go beyond human intelligence. Unlike previous forms of AI, Generative AI
     produces new content, such as images, text or music.

13. AI systems, tools and products are part of a rapidly growing and evolving market, and
     as such, there may be increased risks associated with their adoption. Care should be
     taken to ensure that the use of AI is restricted to use cases where risks can be
     effectively understood and managed.

14. AI has potential to accelerate and support decision making processes, especially
     through the use of large data sets. It is essential to ensure that decisions are made
     with the support of AI systems, not a reliance upon them, in accordance with the
     principles outlined in the Government's Data Ethics Framework and guidance on
     Understanding Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Safety.

15. Content created with the support of LLMs may include inaccurate or misleading
     statements; where statements, facts or references appear plausible, but are in fact
     false. LLMs are trained to predict a "statistically plausible" string of text, however
     statistical plausibility does not necessarily mean that the statements are factually
     accurate. As LLMs do not have a contextual understanding of the question they are
     being asked, or the answer they are proposing, they are unable to identify or correct
     any errors they make in their response. Care must be taken both in the use of LLMs,
     and in assessing returns that have used LLMs, in the form of additional due diligence.

 Contact

16. Enquiries about this PPN should be directed to the Crown Commercial Service
     Helpdesk on 0345 410 2222 or info@crowncommercial.gov.uk.
Annex A - Guidance and Best Practice

 Introduction

          1. Assessing if artificial intelligence is the right solution
2. Government Digital Service (GDS) and the Office for Artificial Intelligence (OAI) have

     published joint guidance2 for anyone responsible for choosing technology in a public
     sector organisation and will help you determine if the use of AI is appropriate for your
     specific use case.

          3. Guidelines for AI Procurement
4. Cabinet Office, Office for Artificial Intelligence (OAI) and the World Economic Forum

     have published joint guidance3 to provide a set of guiding principles on how to buy AI
     technology, as well as insights on tackling challenges that may arise during
     procurement.

          5. A guide to using artificial intelligence in the public sector
6. Government Digital Service (GDS) and the Office for Artificial Intelligence (OAI) have

     published joint guidance4 on how to build and use AI in the public sector. This
     guidance covers how:

          ● to assess if using AI will help you meet user needs

          ● the public sector can best use AI

          ● to implement AI ethically, fairly and safely

7. You can contact ai-guide@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk for further information about
     using AI in the public sector.

          8. Guidance to civil servants on use of Generative AI
9. Generative Artificial Intelligence (Gen AI) is a subset of AI that focuses on creating

     new data. Unlike traditional machine learning models that are designed for specific
     tasks, Gen AI models are capable of generating new content, such as images, text,
     music, and more. Central Digital and Data Office (CDDO) has developed internal
     guidance5 for the use of AI and LLMs across the Civil Service.

2 Assessing if artificial intelligence is the right solution: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/assessing-if- artificial-
   intelligence-is-the-right-solution

3 Guidelines for AI Procurement: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidelines-for-ai-
   procurement

4 A guide to using artificial intelligence in the public sector: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/a-
   guide-to-using-artificial-intelligence-in-the-public-sector

5 Guidance to civil servants on use of generative AI: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-to-
civil-servants-on-use-of-generative-ai
10. CDDO have published further, more detailed guidance6 on Generative AI. The
     Generative AI Framework for HMG is guidance on using Generative AI safely and
     securely for civil servants and people working in government organisations. The white
     paper A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation, sets out five principles to guide and
     inform AI development in all sectors. This framework builds on those principles to
     create ten core principles for generative AI use in government and public sector
     organisations.

          11. Managing your artificial intelligence project
12. Office for Artificial Intelligence (OAI) published guidance7 that provides advice on

     understanding how to manage a project which uses artificial intelligence.

          13. Artificial intelligence in public services
14. The Equality and Human Rights Commission published guidance8 on procuring,

     commissioning, building or adapting AI for the workplace or the services they provide.

          15. Data Ethics Framework
17. Guidance9 for public sector organisations on how to use data appropriately and

     responsibly when planning, implementing, and evaluating a new policy or service.

          18. Understanding Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Safety
19. The Office for Artificial Intelligence (OAI) and the Government Digital Service (GDS)

     have produced guidance10 in partnership with The Alan Turing Institute. This guidance
     will help to ensure your project is fair and prevent bias or discrimination and to
     safeguard public trust in your project's capacity to deliver safe and reliable AI through
     the use of the 'FAST Track Principles'; Fairness, Accountability, Sustainability and
     Transparency.

          20. Links to available training resources
21. There are a range of training resources related to AI available through the

     Government Campus and Civil Service Learning.

      ● Government Campus: Artificial Intelligence11

6 Generative AI Framework for HMG: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/generative-ai-framework-

    for-hmg

7 Managing your artificial intelligence project: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/managing-your-artificial-

    intelligence-project

8 Artificial intelligence in public services: https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/guidance/artificial-

   intelligence-public-services
9 Data Ethics Framework: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/data-ethics-framework

10  Understanding AI Ethics and Safety: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/understanding-artificial-

    intelligence-ethics-and-safety

11  Government Campus AI Courses: https://prospectus.governmentcampus.co.uk/04-artificial-

    intelligence/
    ● Civil Service Learning: Artificial Intelligence12

Annex B – AI Disclosure Questions

In order to establish whether AI has been used by suppliers to develop responses to
questions in the procurement, a disclosure question can be added to the Invitation to
Tender. This requires suppliers to disclose their use of AI when responding to the tender
questions, or as part of their proposed delivery of the service.

There are a series of example disclosure questions set-out below which may be helpful.
The questions included in this annex should not be scored or taken into account
when assessing a tender and should be used for information only. Contracting
authorities can however continue to ask and evaluate any further relevant questions about
use of AI as part of their award process which are specific to their requirements and are
compliant with procurement law. Whether, and if so how, any questions are to be scored
should be set out in the tender notice or associated tender documents.

These questions may be helpful in informing wider commercial strategy, defining how to
undertake meaningful due diligence and manage risk.

Note: It is important that contracting authorities do not discriminate against particular
suppliers in the use of these questions or in the interpretation of supplier responses.

 Example Disclosure Question 1: For Information Only (Not Scored)

 AI tools can be used to improve the efficiency of your bid writing process, however
they may also introduce an increased risk of misleading statements via
‘hallucination’.

Have you used AI or machine learning tools, including large language models, to assist in
any part of your tender submission? This may include using these tools to support the
drafting of responses to award questions.
Yes ロ

No ロ

Please provide details:

Where AI tools have been used to support the generation of Tender responses, please
confirm that they have been checked and verified for accuracy:

12  Civil Service Learning AI Courses: https://learn.civilservice.gov.uk/search?q=artificial+intelligence
Yes ロ
No ロ

 Example Disclosure Question 2: For Information Only (Not Scored)

 AI tools can be used to improve the efficiency of your bid writing process, however
they may also introduce an increased risk of misleading statements via
‘hallucination’.
Please detail any instances where AI or machine learning tools, including large language
models have been used to generate written content, or support your tender submission.
Please provide details:
Where AI tools have been used to support the generation of tender responses, please
confirm that they have been checked and verified for accuracy:
Yes ロ
No ロ

 Example Disclosure Question 3: For Information Only (Not Scored)

Are AI or machine learning technologies used as part of the products/services you intend
to provide to [Insert Contracting Authority Name]?
Yes ロ
No ロ

If Yes: Please describe how AI technologies are integrated into your service offerings.
Please provide details:
